

===== PAGE 1 =====
NTENSIVE studies of the pathophysiology of spinal
cord injury have provided evidence that the primary
mechanical trauma is followed by secondary injury
mechanisms that contribute to the necrotizing process and
that vascular injuries play a key role in both primary and
secondary damage.26,38–40 For example, experimental stud-
ies have reported significant posttraumatic ischemia at the
injured segment and adjacent areas after severe spinal
cord injury.9,10,13,32,33 Using microangiographic techniques,
regions of severe ischemia were demonstrated in the trau-
matized spinal cord in rats, 20,21,34,45 cats,1,5,7,31 rabbits,8,27,44
and monkeys.11 The pathophysiology of vascular mecha-
nisms of secondary neural injury was the topic of a recent
review.37
In the present study, we investigated the vascular sys-
tem in three uninjured human cervical spinal cords using
silicone rubber microangiography. This technique allows
three-dimensional analysis of the intramedullary vessels
after the spinal cord is made transparent with an alco-
hol–methylsalicylate technique.21 The present study is the
first to use this technique to visualize the vascular system
in the human spinal cord. It was believed that this tech-
nique would provide useful information for interpreting
vascular damage in acute spinal cord injury, especially the
phenomena of secondary injury and remote infarction. In
addition, we analyzed histological findings in nine trau-
matized human spinal cords obtained at autopsy. The pur-
pose of these studies was to determine the role of vascular
injuries in the pathophysiology of human spinal cord
injury.
Materials and Methods
Silicone Rubber Angiography in the Uninjured Human
Spinal Cord
Uninjured human spinal cords were removed at the cervical level
in three cadavers during autopsy to examine the normal vascular
system using the silicone rubber microangiographic technique.
These three individuals, aged 62 to 77 years old, had had no spinal
cord lesions and died of cerebrovascular accidents or pneumonia.
The interval from death to autopsy ranged from 18 to 66 hours.
Before removing the spinal cord, the left vertebral artery was can-
nulated at its origin at the subclavian artery and was infused with
800 to 1000 ml saline. The spinal cord was then removed from C-2
J. Neurosurg. / Volume 86 / March, 1997
J Neurosurg 86:483–492, 1997
Vascular mechanisms in the pathophysiology of human
spinal cord injury
CHARLES H. TATOR, M.D., PH.D., F.R.C.S.(C), AND IZUMI KOYANAGI, M.D.
Canadian Paraplegic Association Spinal Cord Injury Research Laboratory, Division of Neurosurgery
and Playfair Neuroscience Unit, The Toronto Hospital, Western Division, and the University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
U Vascular injury plays an important role in the primary and secondary injury mechanisms that cause damage to the
acutely traumatized spinal cord. To understand the pathophysiology of human spinal cord injury, the authors investi-
gated the vascular system in three uninjured human spinal cords using silicone rubber microangiography and analyzed
the histological findings related to vascular injury in nine acutely traumatized human spinal cords obtained at autopsy.
The interval from spinal cord injury to death ranged from 20 minutes to 9 months. The microangiograms of the unin-
jured human cervical cords demonstrated new information about the sulcal arterial system and the pial arteries. The
centrifugal sulcal arterial system was found to supply all of the anterior gray matter, the anterior half of the posterior
gray matter, approximately the inner half of the anterior and lateral white columns, and the anterior half of the poste-
rior white columns. Traumatized spinal cord specimens in the acute stage (3–5 days postinjury) showed severe hem-
orrhages predominantly in the gray matter, but also in the white matter. The white matter surrounding the hemorrhag-
ic gray matter showed a variety of lesions, including decreased staining, disrupted myelin, and axonal and periaxonal
swelling. The white matter lesions extended far from the injury site, especially in the posterior columns. There was no
evidence of complete occlusion of any of the larger arteries, including the anterior and posterior spinal arteries and the
sulcal arteries. However, occluded intramedullary veins were identified in the degenerated posterior white columns. In
the chronic stage (3–9 months postinjury), the injured segments showed major tissue loss with large cavitations, where-
as both rostral and caudal remote sites showed well-demarcated necrotic areas indicative of infarction mainly in the
posterior white columns. Obstruction of small intramedullary arteries and veins by the initial mechanical stress or sec-
ondary injury mechanisms most likely produced these extensive white matter lesions. Our studies implicate damage to
the anterior sulcal arteries in causing the hemorrhagic necrosis and subsequent central myelomalacia at the injury site
in acute spinal cord injury in humans.
KEY WORDS • acute spinal cord injury • vascular lesion • pathology • humans
I
483
Brought to you by NIH Library | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/16/26 11:52 AM UTC



===== PAGE 2 =====
to T-2 (two cases) or from C-4 to T-2 (one case) by means of an
anterior approach.
The C-5 anterior radiculomedullary artery was cannulated with a
tapered PE-50 tubing under a dissecting microscope. The cut ends
of the anterior spinal artery and other radiculomedullary arteries
transected during removal of the cords were then ligated with
No. 6-0 nylon or No. 4-0 silk. Silicone rubber (Microfil; Flow Tek,
Inc., Boulder, CO) was prepared immediately before injection. The
spinal cord was perfused with 1 to 5 ml of saline from the PE-50
tubing and 0.7 to 1 ml of silicone rubber was injected manually
through a 1-ml syringe for approximately 5 minutes. Following the
silicone rubber injection, the spinal cords were stored in a refriger-
ator overnight, after which they were immersed in 10% buffered
formalin for at least 3 weeks.
The vasculature on the surface of the spinal cord was inspected
using a dissecting microscope. The cord was dehydrated with alco-
hol and immersed in methylsalicylate, which rendered the tissue
transparent. The cord was then cut transversely or coronally into 2-
mm slices with a razor blade. The cord slices were immersed in
methylsalicylate in a petri dish, and the intramedullary vasculature
was inspected through a microscope. The course of the intra-
medullary vessels could be tracked by changing the microscopic
focus, which allowed a three-dimensional analysis of the vessels in
these 2-mm thick sections.
Histological Analysis of Acute Human Spinal Cord Injury
To investigate the vascular changes that occur in acute spinal
cord injury, the histological findings in the acutely traumatized spi-
nal cords of nine autopsy cases were analyzed. These nine patients,
who were aged 10 to 79 years when they died, had suffered com-
plete or incomplete cord injury at the cervical level (Table 1). One
patient died immediately after he had sustained a high cervical cord
injury in a traffic accident. The other eight patients died of pneu-
monia, pulmonary embolism, or brainstem infarction 3 days to 9
months after they had sustained cervical trauma (Table 1). The
spinal cord specimens were stained with hematoxylin and eosin for
general features and luxol fast blue stain for myelinated axons.
Results
Vascular System in the Nontraumatized Cervical Cord
Most of the arterial system on the surface of the non-
traumatized spinal cord was completely filled with the sil-
icone rubber (Fig. 1 upper), although segments of the pos-
terior spinal arteries were only partially filled in two of the
cords. Two of the cords also showed filling of the venous
channels on the surface of the cords.
Anterior Surface. The outer layer of the pia mater was
found to cover the anterior spinal artery and vein on the
anterior surface. Two to six anterior radiculomedullary
arteries fed the anterior spinal artery in the examined
segments. The anterior spinal artery consisted of a single
trunk in one spinal cord and divided into two vessels for a
short distance in the other two spinal cords. The anterior
spinal artery gave rise to sulcal arteries, which travelled in
the anterior median sulcus, and also a few small caliber
lateral branches, which traveled over the anterior surface
of the spinal cord. The sulcal arteries ran into the anterior
median sulcus and traveled in a slightly rostral direction to
enter either the left or right half of the spinal cord (Fig. 1
center). Usually a sulcal artery supplied only one side of
the cord with the adjacent sulcal artery supplying the other
side. A small number of sulcal arteries were found to sup-
ply both sides of the spinal cord. The mean number of sul-
cal arteries per centimeter of cord in the examined seg-
ments was 4.6 (Table 2). There was overlap in the supply
C. H. Tator and I. Koyanagi
484 J. Neurosurg. / Volume 86 / March, 1997
TABLE 1
Clinical features, surgical treatment, and cause of death in nine cases of acute spinal cord injury
AgeInterval
Case (yrs),From Injury
No. Sex Cause of Injury Level & Type of Injury Clinical State Surgical Treatment Cause of Death to Death
1 10, M traffic accident C1–2 odontoid fracture complete cord injury none high cervical cord injury 20 min
2 39, M traffic accident C4–5 anterior dislocation complete cord injury open reduction, C4–5 laminectomy, brainstem infarction due to traumatic 3 days
perfusion & myelotomy, posterior occlusion of rt vertebral artery
fusion
3 79, F traffic accident C4–5 fracture dislocation incomplete cord injury* none brainstem infarction due to traumatic 5 days
occlusion of lt vertebral artery
4 37, M diving C-7 body fracture complete cord injury none acute pulmonary embolism 17 days
5 65, F traffic accident C1–2 atlantoaxial dislocation complete cord injury none acute bronchopneumonia 18 days
6 56, M fall C4–5 fracture dislocation complete cord injury none acute bronchopneumonia 3 mos
7 72, F traffic accident C5–6 fracture dislocation complete cord injury posterior fusion acute bronchopneumonia 3 mos
8 52, M traffic accident C5–6 anterior dislocation complete cord injury none acute bronchopneumonia 7 mos
9 70, F fall C1–2 odontoid fracture complete cord injury posterior fusion acute bronchopneumonia 9 mos
* Complete motor loss with sacral sparing.
Brought to you by NIH Library | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/16/26 11:52 AM UTC



===== PAGE 3 =====
so that each segment of gray matter contained capillaries
branching from two to three sulcal arteries. These features
could be appreciated three-dimensionally in the cleared
specimens. In the anterior sulcus, the sulcal arteries often
had small direct branches to the medial anterior white
columns. Bifurcation of the sulcal artery was common in
the anterior sulcus: 13 to 28% (mean 19%) of the sulcal
arteries bifurcated in the anterior median sulcus. These
bifurcated sulcal arteries frequently supplied the spinal
cord bilaterally, although each branch supplied only one-
half of the cord (Table 2).
The lateral branches of the anterior spinal artery
coursed subpially over the anterior and lateral white col-
umns. The mean number of these lateral branches was 1.6
per centimeter of cord (Table 2). Many of the lateral
branches that reached the lateral columns connected sub-
pially with branches of the posterior spinal arteries (Fig. 1
lower). Connections between lateral branches of the ante-
rior spinal artery themselves also occurred on the lateral
surface of the cord.
The anterior spinal vein ran alongside the anterior spi-
nal artery in the anterior aspect of the sulcus, although the
anterior spinal vein was generally situated slightly poste-
rior to the anterior spinal artery. The anterior spinal vein
received sulcal veins in the anterior median sulcus and
superficial veins on the anterior surface.
Posterior Surface. The posterior spinal veins and the
posterior spinal arteries were situated on the posterior pial
surface in the subarachnoid space, and arachnoid trabecu-
lae were identified along the posterior midline. In contrast,
on the anterior surface the anterior spinal artery and veins
were covered by pia mater and there were no trabeculae in
the anterior subarachnoid space. The posterior spinal ar-
teries were usually paired arterial channels that ran imme-
J. Neurosurg. / Volume 86 / March, 1997                                                                                                   
Human spinal cord injury
485
FIG. 1. Postmortem photographs of nontraumatized spinal cord.
Upper: The anterior surface of the cervical cord. The rostral end
is to the left. Silicone rubber was injected into the C-5 radicu-
lomedullary artery through tapered PE-50 tubing (arrow). The
arterial and venous channels over the spinal cord surface are almost
completely filled with silicone rubber. Center: The anterior sur-
face and anterior median sulcus of the cervical cord after silicone
rubber injection. The pia mater, which covers the anterior spinal
artery and vein, has been divided. The rostral end is to the left. The
forceps are holding the pia mater on the anterior surface to open the
anterior median sulcus where the sulcal arteries are seen as branch-
es of the anterior spinal artery (A). At the posterior end of the ante-
rior median sulcus, the sulcal arteries (arrows) course laterally in
front of the anterior white commissure and enter either the right or
left half of the spinal cord. Lower: Lateral surface of the spinal
cord at the C7–8 level after silicone rubber injection. The anterior
spinal artery (A) gives rise to a lateral branch (arrow), which then
courses over the anterior and lateral       F IG. 1 (continued)¨
surfaces of the cord. Subsequently, this branch extends subpially
(lower arrowhead) under the dentate ligament, which can be dis-
cerned as the faint white structure (D), and then communicates
with a small branch from the posterior spinal artery (upper two
arrowheads).
TABLE 2
Sulcal arteries and lateral branches of the anterior spinal artery
in three uninjured human spinal cords*
Uninjured Spinal Cord
Factor Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Mean
cord length (cm) 7.0 11.2 4.4 7.5
levels C4–T1 C3–T1 C4–C6 NA
no. of SAs in cord specimen 29 49 23 33.7
no. of SAs/cm 4.1 4.4 5.2 4.6
no. of bifurcated SAs (%)† 8 (28) 8 (16)‡ 3 (13) 6.3 (19)
bilat supply (no. of SAs)§ 4 5 3 4
no. of LBs in cord specimen 7 21 8 12
no. of LBs/cm 1.0 1.9 1.8 1.6
* LB = lateral branch of the anterior spinal artery; NA = not applicable;
SA = sulcal artery.
† The number of sulcal arteries that bifurcated in the anterior median sul-
cus.
‡ One of these eight sulcal arteries showed trifurcation.
§ Number of bifurcated sulcal arteries that supplied the spinal cord bilat-
erally.
Brought to you by NIH Library | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/16/26 11:52 AM UTC



===== PAGE 4 =====
diately medial or lateral to the posterior root entry zone on
each side and connected with each other over the posteri-
or surface through numerous communicating branches.
Intramedullary Vessels. The sulcal arteries supplied all
of the anterior gray matter and the anterior part of the pos-
terior gray matter (Fig. 2 upper). Branches of the sulcal
arteries coursed through the gray matter and then supplied
approximately the inner half of the anterior and lateral
white columns (Fig. 2 center). The base of the posterior
white columns was also supplied by branches from the
sulcal arteries (Fig. 2 right). Approximately the outer half
of the anterior and lateral white columns was supplied by
the centripetal arterial system from the pial arteries. The
posterior spinal arteries and their branches supplied the
posterior part of the posterior gray matter and approxi-
mately the posterior half of the posterior white columns.
The intramedullary veins were only partially filled with
silicone rubber. The radial veins in the anterior and lateral
white columns and the posterior septal veins in the poste-
rior white columns were identified in two cords.
Histological Analysis of Acute Spinal Cord Injury
Immediate Period. In the patient who died approximate-
C. H. Tator and I. Koyanagi
486 J. Neurosurg. / Volume 86 / March, 1997
FIG. 2. Silicone rubber microangiograms of a nontraumatized
spinal cord at the C-8 level after clearing away the tissue. Original
magnification 3 20. Upper: Transverse view clearly demon-
strating intramedullary vessels, although the posterior gray matter
and posterior white columns are partially filled. Center: Trans-
verse view of the anterolateral spinal cord demonstrating a sulcal
artery (SA) supplying the capillary network of the gray matter of
the anterior horn. The branches of the sulcal artery supply approx-
imately the inner half of the lateral and anterior white matter. The
asterisks indicate the watershed zone between the sulcal arterial
system and the pial arterial system (seen to the left of the asterisks).
The arrow indicates extravasated silicone. Lower: Transverse
view of the central segment and posterior white columns showing
that the branches (arrows) of the sulcal arteries (SA) extend into
the base of the posterior white columns.
FIG. 3. Case 1. Photomicrographs showing a transverse section
of the traumatized spinal cord in a patient who died shortly after a
complete cord lesion due to atlantoaxial dislocation. H & E.
Upper:The spinal cord at the C-1 level at low magnification shows
an almost normal appearance. Original magnification 3 7. Low-
er: Higher magnification of this section reveals multiple small
hemorrhages in the anterolateral gray matter. Original magnifica-
tion 3 100.
Brought to you by NIH Library | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/16/26 11:52 AM UTC



===== PAGE 5 =====
ly 20 minutes after he had been injured in a traffic accident
(Case 1), the spinal cord was found to be transected at
C1–2 due to atlantoaxial dislocation and a fractured odon-
toid process. Histological sections obtained from the C-1
level showed an almost normal appearance except for
multiple small hemorrhages in the gray matter (Fig. 3).
Acute Phase. Two patients (Cases 2 and 3) died 3 and 5
days, respectively, after they had sustained spinal trauma
as a result of brainstem infarction caused by traumatic
occlusion of the vertebral artery. The patient in Case 2 had
a C4–5 anterior dislocation and was treated surgically on
the day of injury by open reduction, C4–5 laminectomy,
posterior midline myelotomy, and hypothermic perfu-
sion at the injured segment. Histological analysis of the
traumatized segment in this case showed marked in-
tramedullary hemorrhage that involved almost the whole
spinal cord in the transverse plane (Fig. 4 upper left). The
anterior spinal artery and sulcal artery at this level were
patent, although the anterior spinal artery showed invasion
of polymorphonuclear cells in the endothelial layer. At the
adjacent level (approximately C-3) where the dura mater
was intact and, hence, distant from the operated seg-
ment, the spinal cord showed decreased staining centrally
with intact peripheral white matter (Fig. 4 upper right).
The affected white matter in this level was almost totally
necrotic, showing disrupted myelin, enlarged periaxonal
spaces, swollen axons, and invasion of polymorphonu-
clear cells. Many intramedullary veins in the posterior
white columns were occluded and filled with polymor-
phonuclear cells (Fig. 4 lower left ). The gray matter
showed major stagnation of flow with many small vessels
packed with red blood cells, extravasation of red blood
cells, and invasion of the tissue by polymorphonuclear
cells. At the more rostral level (approximately C-2), the
necrotic changes and red cell extravasation were more
confined to the basal part of the posterior white columns
and focal segments of the lateral white columns (Fig. 4
lower right).
J. Neurosurg. / Volume 86 / March, 1997                                                                                                   
Human spinal cord injury
487
FIG. 4. Case 2. Photomicrographs displaying transverse sections of the traumatized spinal cord 3 days after complete
cord lesion due to C4–5 anterior dislocation. H & E. Upper Left: The injury site (C4–5 level) shows marked in-
tramedullary hemorrhages in the gray and white matter. Original magnification 3 7. Upper Right:The rostral segment
of the cord at approximately the C-3 level shows decreased staining in the gray matter and the central half of the white
matter. There was preservation of the peripheral white matter. There were no hemorrhages. Original magnification 3 7.
Lower Left: Higher magnification of a portion of central white matter of the posterior columns of the section shown in
upper right. The veins were occluded with polymorphonuclear cells (arrow) and the central white matter was totally
necrotic with many polymorphonuclear cells identified in this area. Original magnification 3 400. Lower Right:A por-
tion of the cord farther rostral to that seen in upper right, at approximately the C-2 level. The central areas of decreased
staining are much smaller than those seen in upper right and were confined to the base of the posterior white columns
and part of the lateral white matter. Original magnification 3 7.
Brought to you by NIH Library | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/16/26 11:52 AM UTC



===== PAGE 6 =====
In Case 3, in which the patient had suffered a C4–5 frac-
ture dislocation and an incomplete cord lesion (complete
loss of distal motor function, but sparing of sacral sen-
sation), the gray matter of the injured segment showed
numerous hemorrhages and the white matter surrounding
the hemorrhagic gray matter showed extensive necrosis
(Fig. 5). Much of the peripheral white matter showed a
more normal appearance with persisting myelinated axons
in the subpial rim of tissue. There was no evidence of
occlusion of the anterior spinal artery or sulcal arteries.
Subacute Phase. The patient in Case 4 died of acute pul-
monary embolism at 17 days and the patient in Case 5
died of acute bronchopneumonia at 18 days after sustain-
ing spinal trauma. Cases 4 and 5 did not show any dis-
cernible normal white matter at the injury site, even in the
subpial rim. The tissue was completely replaced by lipid-
laden phagocytic cells that frequently contained hemo-
siderin. Many dilated small vessels were also identified
(Fig. 6), which were most likely new vessels proliferating
into the necrotic tissue. At adjacent levels, the white mat-
ter showed varying degrees of degeneration with a variety
of degenerative axonal changes, including enlargement of
the periaxonal spaces and swollen giant axons.
Chronic Phase. Four patients (Cases 6–9) died of pneu-
monia 3 to 9 months after they had sustained trauma. In
two of these patients (Cases 6 and 7), the spinal cord at the
injured segment showed complete necrosis with virtually
no identifiable normal gray or white matter even at the
subpial rim (Fig. 7 upper), although there was some glio-
sis and many phagocytic cells. In two patients (Cases
8 and 9), there was some remaining peripheral white mat-
ter. At the adjacent rostral and caudal segments, 1 to 2
cm remote from the injury site, the base of the posterior
columns contained clearly demarcated areas of necrosis
that were highly suggestive of discrete infarcts (Fig. 7
lower). In these remote necrotic areas, there was no evi-
dence of previous hemorrhage such as deposits of hemo-
siderin. Similar remote discrete infarcts were also ob-
served in the lateral white matter in one case. Clusters and
nests of proliferating Schwann cells were observed in the
posterior and anterior white columns at the injury site in
two cases (Cases 8 and 9).
Discussion
Blood Supply to the Human Spinal Cord
The aim of examining the blood supply to the human
spinal cord using three-dimensional silicone rubber mi-
croangiography was to obtain information for determining
the pathophysiology of major vascular lesions in human
spinal cord injury. There have been many excellent stud-
ies of the blood supply of the human spinal cord, which
have demonstrated the centrifugal supply from the sulcal
arteries, the centripetal supply from the posterior spinal
and pial arteries, and the intervening watershed zones
supplied through both routes. 3,12,14,15,22,40–43 The present
three-dimensional study confirms this arrangement. We
also demonstrated the origin of the pial arteries as lateral
branches from the anterior spinal artery and that these
communicate extensively with lateral branches originat-
ing from the posterior spinal arteries. The sulcal arteries,
which number approximately four to five per centimeter
of cervical cord, often bifurcate in the anterior median sul-
cus. These findings are also similar to those described by
other authors.42,43 However, the descriptions of the pattern
of the intramedullary arterial supply in the human spi-
nal cord have differed among the authors. According to
Turnbull and colleagues41,42 and Lazorthes, et al.,22 the sul-
cal arteries supply most of the gray matter and also the
base of the posterior white columns (Fig. 8). These au-
thors showed that the overlap between the zones of supply
from the centrifugal sulcal arteries and the centripetal
penetrating arteries is located at the junction of the outer
border of the gray matter and adjacent white matter.
C. H. Tator and I. Koyanagi
488 J. Neurosurg. / Volume 86 / March, 1997
FIG. 5. Case 3. Photomicrograph showing the traumatized
spinal cord at the C-4 level 5 days after an incomplete cord injury
due to a C4–5 fracture dislocation. Multiple hemorrhages are con-
fined to the gray matter. The white matter adjacent to the hemor-
rhagic gray matter shows decreased staining, whereas the subpial
peripheral white matter of the lateral and posterior columns is
preserved. H & E and luxol fast blue, original magnification 3 7.
FIG. 6. Case 4. Photomicrograph showing the traumatized
spinal cord 17 days after complete cord injury due to C-7 body
fracture. The gray matter of the injured segment contains many
phagocytic cells with foamy cytoplasm. Dilated small vessels
(arrows) are also identified. There are no persisting neurons.
H & E, original magnification 3 400.
Brought to you by NIH Library | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/16/26 11:52 AM UTC



===== PAGE 7 =====
Furthermore, these reports showed that most of the white
lateral columns are supplied only by the penetrating
branches from the pial arterial plexus. In contrast, accord-
ing to Gillilan’s12 study, the penetrating arteries from the
pial arteries supply the outer rim of the white matter and
the overlapping area, which is much larger than that found
by Turnbull and colleagues, and comprises the outer rim
of the gray matter and the inner two-thirds of the white
matter in the lateral and anterior spinal cord (Fig. 8).
Herren and Alexander15 reported that the lateral cortico-
spinal tract is nourished by branches of the sulcal arteries,
a finding supported by the present study. Although some
of the differences in observations by previous investiga-
tors might be due to variations in vasculature in different
spinal cord specimens, it is more likely that the discrepan-
cies are due to the difficulties in differentiating arteries
from veins inherent in the postmortem two-dimensional
microangiographic techniques used in previous studies.
The lack of three-dimensional observation is also likely to
have produced misinterpretation of the zones of supply. In
contrast, the three-dimensional silicone rubber microan-
giographic technique used in the present study allows
accurate mapping of the extent of supply and also is of
major benefit in differentiating arteries and veins. Also,
our injection technique fills mainly the arterial system and
capillaries; this aided our differentiation between arteries
and veins. The present results prove that the sulcal arteri-
al system supplies all the anterior gray matter, the anterior
half of the posterior gray matter, approximately the inner
half of the anterior and lateral white matter columns, and
the anterior half of the posterior white columns (Fig. 8). It
is of interest that the distribution of peripheral white mat-
ter lesions caused by a pial arterial circulatory disturbance
J. Neurosurg. / Volume 86 / March, 1997                                                                                                   
Human spinal cord injury
489
FIG. 7. Case 7. Photomicrographs displaying the traumatized
spinal cord 3 months after complete cord injury due to C5–6 frac-
ture dislocation. Upper: The injured segment shows marked
necrosis and disorganization with virtually no identifiable gray
matter. The anterior spinal artery at the lowermost aspect of the
specimen was patent. Lower: A rostral segment of the cord at
approximately C-3. Well-demarcated necrotic areas (arrows),
which have the appearance of circumscribed infarcts, are seen at
the base of the posterior white columns. The more external portion
of the posterior white columns shows Wallerian degeneration. H &
E and luxol fast blue, original magnification 3 7.
FIG. 8. Diagrams displaying patterns of arterial supply in the
normal human cervical cord. The central area is supplied by the
centrifugal arterial system composed of branches of the sulcal ar-
teries (SA). The peripheral white matter and the posterior portion
of the posterior gray matter are supplied by the centripetal arterial
system composed of branches of the posterior spinal arteries and
the pial arteries (PA). The shaded area shows the overlap or water-
shed zone between the centrifugal and centripetal arterial systems.
Note the differences in the patterns of arterial supply between pre-
vious authors and the present study. The present findings indicate
that the centrifugal system supplies most of the gray matter and the
medial white matter of the anterior, lateral, and posterior white
columns.
Brought to you by NIH Library | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/16/26 11:52 AM UTC



===== PAGE 8 =====
in the two autopsy cases of systemic lupus erythematosus
reported by Nakano, et al.,25 is consistent with our findings
concerning the pattern of vascular supply in the cord.
Histology and Pathophysiology of Vascular Lesions in
Human Spinal Cord Injury
Although the present study included only one case ex-
amined in the 1st hour after injury, in the literature there
are several cases examined within the first 24 hours after
severe spinal cord injury that have shown petechial and
more confluent hemorrhages in much of the gray mat-
ter. The absence of cellular and tissue necrosis in the ear-
ly period has been reported in several studies of human
spinal cord injury.16–18,23 Thereafter, there is evidence for
a progressive necrotizing process. In the present study,
specimens examined 3 to 5 days after injury showed
severe tissue necrosis and an inflammatory cell infiltration
that affected the gray matter and extended out into the
white matter. Our study confirmed that none of the major
arteries on the surface of the human spinal cord, including
the anterior and posterior spinal arteries, are occluded at
the injury site or remotely at any time after trauma. This
finding corresponds to those of our previous microangio-
graphic studies20,21,45 in a rat model of spinal cord injury in
which there was extensive occlusion and vasospasm of
intramedullary vessels, but patency of the large arteries at
all times after injury. Jellinger16 also reported that in hu-
man spinal cord injury traumatic occlusion or thrombosis
of the major arteries on the surface of the cord is extreme-
ly rare. These findings lead to the conclusion that the loca-
tion of vascular damage in human spinal cord injury is pri-
marily in the intramedullary vascular system. 
It is of major interest that the supply territory of the sul-
cal arteries, as defined by the microangiographic study,
corresponds very closely to the distribution of both the
hemorrhagic necrosis in the acute phase and the central
myelomalacia and cavitation of the later phases, which
involve most of the gray matter and at least the inner half
of the white matter of the anterior, lateral, and posterior
columns. Thus, the site of the major arterial injury impli-
cated in acute spinal cord trauma is the anterior sulcal
artery within a short distance from its origin at the anteri-
or spinal artery. To produce the extensive bilateral areas of
damage in the rostral–caudal plane, which were seen in
most of the cases of acute spinal cord injury examined in
the present study, would require damage to several anteri-
or sulcal arteries because these arteries supply alternate
sides of the cord and overlap with two or three sulcal
arteries supplying each destination. We found an average
of 4.6 sulcal arteries per centimeter of cord and estimate
that to produce a complete cord injury, such as that shown
in Fig. 4 upper right, would likely involve damage to
approximately 1 cm of cord tissue containing two or three
sulcal arteries supplying blood to each side. Incomplete
cord injuries, such as that shown in Fig. 5, might occur
from shorter lengths of damaged cord containing only one
or two sulcal arteries on each side. Occlusion of the sulcal
arteries more distally would allow greater preservation of
the anterior parts of the cord (Fig. 5), which would con-
tinue to receive blood through persisting small branches
of the sulcal artery arising in the anterior median sulcus.
Thus, our findings also suggest that less severe injuries
would damage the sulcal arteries distally, whereas more
severe injuries would damage the sulcal arteries proxi-
mally. The exact nature of the arterial damage could be
direct mechanical damage or a secondary process such as
vasospasm.
It is acknowledged that there are alternative explana-
tions for central hemorrhagic necrosis and central myelo-
malacia. For example, it could be hypothesized that the
principle anatomical site of vascular injury is the endothe-
lial cells of capillaries, either by direct mechanical trauma
or secondary to ischemia. In turn, endothelial cell damage
would result in hemorrhage and then infarction. However,
this concept of endothelial cell capillary damage is less
consistent with the anatomical distribution of central hem-
orrhagic necrosis and myelomalacia than the sulcal artery
hypothesis.
In the present study, at the injury site the gray matter
was more prone to be hemorrhagic, whereas most of
the white matter showed nonhemorrhagic degenerative
changes including decreased staining, periaxonal and ax-
onal swelling, and disruption of myelin in the acute stage
(3–5 days postinjury). These white matter lesions were
distributed around the hemorrhagic gray matter and ex-
tended rostrally and caudally from the injury site, espe-
cially in the posterior white columns. It is highly likely
that these nonhemorrhagic white matter lesions progress
in time to become the well-demarcated necrotic white
matter areas in the later stages that have the histological
appearance of infarcts. The predominance of hemorrhages
in the gray matter can be explained on the basis of the rich
capillary network in the gray matter, the latter being high-
ly susceptible to mechanical stress because of its looser,
more yielding texture. The surrounding white matter le-
sions may be partly explained by the centrifugal vascular
supply of the sulcal arteries. As noted above, silicone rub-
ber microangiograms showed that the inner half of the
white matter was predominantly supplied by small arteri-
al branches from the sulcal arteries, which course through
the gray matter to reach the white matter. Thus, it is high-
ly likely that interference with the sulcal centrifugal arte-
rial system in the gray matter leads to a subsequent inter-
ruption of blood flow to the inner half of the white matter.
Similar to the above discussion about proximal and distal
C. H. Tator and I. Koyanagi
490 J. Neurosurg. / Volume 86 / March, 1997
FIG. 9. Diagram showing vessels that would be affected to pro-
duce the histological appearance of major central necrosis (stippled
area) with a subpial rim of surviving white matter. Hemorrhages
are not shown. The lines across the arrows indicate damaged ves-
sels. ASA = anterior spinal artery; PSA = posterior spinal artery;
SA = sulcal artery.
Brought to you by NIH Library | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/16/26 11:52 AM UTC



===== PAGE 9 =====
sulcal artery damage, the possible mechanisms of interfer-
ence with these “en passage” smaller branches of the sul-
cal arteries would include direct mechanical or secondary
damage (Fig. 9). There is experimental evidence for the
concept of secondary vascular damage involving the
centripetal sulcal system. For example, we found a direct
relationship between hemorrhagic gray matter and adja-
cent ischemic zones in the white matter in rats after acute
clip-compression injury studied with colloidal carbon
angiography.45 Also, our laboratory previously showed
vasospasm of the sulcal arteries20 in similarly injured rats
studied with polyester resin and scanning electron mi-
croscopy.
Our laboratory and others have also postulated that
ischemia of the posterior white columns can be produced
by disturbances of venous drainage in the acutely trau-
matized spinal cord. 20,21,35,36 Support for this hypothesis
comes from observations that venous occlusion in the
spinal cord in various pathological conditions causes pre-
dominantly white matter lesions.19,28,30 With a weight-drop
model of mild spinal cord injury, Dohrmann and associ-
ates6 reported that disruption of the muscular venules in
the gray matter occurs early after trauma in primates.
In the present study, we found occluded veins filled
with polymorphonuclear cells in the degenerated posteri-
or white columns in the acute stage (Case 2). However, it
was not possible to determine whether the venous occlu-
sion was caused by direct mechanical damage of the veins
or was secondary to arterial or capillary occlusion. In
our opinion, it is highly likely that venous damage, either
direct or secondary, contributes significantly to the non-
hemorrhagic white matter lesions. Our previous studies of
veins in rats with spinal cord injury using silicone rub-
ber angiography demonstrated several anatomical features
that make these veins suceptible to occlusion during com-
pression injury.21 Unfortunately, the present study did not
provide sufficient opportunity to study the anatomy of the
venous drainage to determine if there are similar anatom-
ical features in the human cord.
The distribution of mechanical stress in the traumatized
spinal cord could be another important factor affecting the
vasculature to cause the extensive white matter lesions.
Blight and Decrescito 2 used silastic tubing filled with
gelatin as a physical model of the spinal cord to demon-
strate that an anteroposterior compressive force on the
tube produces longitudinal stress that is most intense in
the center of the tube. Because the pia mater is a strong
membrane, the large vessels on the surface of the spi-
nal cord and in the anterior median sulcus would be rela-
tively spared from major damage due to mechanical
stress exerted in the anteroposterior direction. However,
the smaller intramedullary vessels would be stretched in
the longitudinal plane. Differences in compliance in the
spinal cord may produce a shearing stress on microvessels
that form a bridge between the gray and white matter.
Such a stretching force and shearing stress may obstruct
the microvessels directly, or initiate secondary pathologi-
cal responses in the vascular walls, such as platelet aggre-
gation or invasion by polymorphonuclear cells, which
subsequently lead to vascular occlusion.
McVeigh24 postulated that necrotic, pulped spinal cord
tissue produced in the traumatized segment could invade
longitudinally and travel rostrally and caudally in the cen-
ter of the cord. He considered that the remote lesions in
the posterior white columns are caused by invasion of the
pulped mass. We saw no evidence of this process in our
cases. For example, there was no evidence of hemorrhag-
ic tissue in these remote areas of necrotic white matter
in the acute stage, and there was no evidence of previous
hemorrhage in the necrotic white matter in the chronic
stage.
Recently, Quencer, et al.,29 and Bunge, et al.,4 reported
excellent studies of the pathological findings of the
traumatized spinal cord in humans. In particular, they
showed a lack of hemorrhage in the gray and white matter
in several cases of central cord syndrome. Instead, they
found major axonal injury in the lateral corticospinal
tracts which they attributed to anteroposterior compres-
sion forces. Although they did not mention the possibility
of a vascular mechanism of injury, our studies suggest that
stretching or compression of the centrifugal sulcal branch-
es might result in occlusion or constriction of these vessels
supplying the corticospinal tracts.
Further investigation is necessary to elucidate the
pathophysiology of hemorrhagic gray matter lesions and
nonhemorrhagic white matter lesions in acute spinal cord
injury in humans. To date, our investigations provide
evidence of the importance of the centrifugal sulcal arte-
rial system, which may be the principal site of the prima-
ry direct mechanical injury and the secondary mecha-
nisms of injury, some of which (such as vasospasm) may
be delayed and amenable to treatment.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. John H. N. Deck, Division of Neuropathology,
Department of Pathology, The Toronto Hospital, for providing the
histological material in the cases of acute spinal cord injury, and Dr.
Peter Dirks for helping to prepare the cervical cord specimens for
microangiography. Grateful acknowledgement is also made to Mr.
Jim Loukides for his technical assistance. 
References
1. Allen WE III, D’Angelo CM, Kier EL: Correlation of microan-
giographic and electrophysiologic changes in experimental
spinal cord trauma. Radiology 111:107–115, 1974
2. Blight AR, Decrescito V: Morphometric analysis of experimen-
tal spinal cord injury in the cat: the relation of injury intensity
to survival of myelinated axons. Neuroscience 19:321–341,
1986
3. Bolton B: The blood supply of the human spinal cord. J Neurol
Psychiatry 2:137–148, 1939
4. Bunge RP, Puckett WR, Becerra JL, et al: Observations on the
pathology of human spinal cord injury. A review and classifi-
cation of 22 new cases with details from a case of chronic cord
compression with extensive focal demyelination. Adv Neurol
59:75–89, 1993
5. Dohrmann GJ, Allen WE III: Microcirculation of traumatized
spinal cord. A correlation of microangiography and blood flow
patterns in transitory and permanent paraplegia. J Trauma 15:
1003–1013, 1975
6. Dohrmann GJ, Wagner FC Jr, Bucy PC: The microvasculature
in transitory traumatic paraplegia. An electron microscopic
study in the monkey. J Neurosurg 35:263–271, 1971
7. Dohrmann GJ, Wick KM, Bucy PC: Spinal cord blood flow pat-
terns in experimental traumatic paraplegia. J Neurosurg 38:
52–58, 1973
J. Neurosurg. / Volume 86 / March, 1997                                                                                                   491
Human spinal cord injury
Brought to you by NIH Library | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/16/26 11:52 AM UTC



===== PAGE 10 =====
8. Fairholm DJ, Turnbull IM: Microangiographic study of experi-
mental spinal cord injuries. J Neurosurg 35:277–286, 1971
9. Fehlings MG, Tator CH, Linden RD: The effect of nimodipine
and dextran on axonal function and blood flow following ex-
perimental spinal cord injury. J Neurosurg 71:403–416, 1989
10. Fehlings MG, Tator CH, Linden RD: The relationship among
the severity of spinal cord injury, motor and sensory evoked po-
tentials and spinal cord blood flow. Electroencephalog Clin
Neurophysiol 74:241–259, 1989
11. Fried LC, Goodkin R: Microangiographic observations of
the experimentally traumatized spinal cord. J Neurosurg 35:
709–714, 1971
12. Gillilan LA: The arterial blood supply of the human spinal cord.
J Comp Neurol 110:75–103, 1958
13. Guha A, Tator CH, Rochon J: Spinal cord blood flow and sys-
temic blood pressure after experimental spinal cord injury in
rats. Stroke 20:372–377, 1989
14. Hassler O: Blood supply to human spinal cord. A microangio-
graphic study. Arch Neurol 15:302–307, 1966
15. Herren RY, Alexander L: Sulcal and intrinsic blood vessels
of human spinal cord. Arch Neurol Psychiatry 41:678–687,
1939
16. Jellinger K: Neuropathology of cord injuries, in Vinken PJ,
Bruyn GW (eds): Handbook of Clinical Neurology. Vol 25:
Injury of the Spine and Spinal Cord. Part 1. Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1976, pp 43–121
17. Kakulas BA: Pathology of spinal injuries. Cent Nerv Syst
Trauma 1:117–129, 1984
18. Kakulas BA, Taylor JR: Pathology of injuries of the vertebral
column and spinal cord, in Vinken PJ, Bruyn GW, Klawans
HL, Frankel HL (eds):Handbook of Clinical Neurology. Vol
61: Spinal Cord Trauma. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1992,
pp 21–51
19. Kim RC, Smith HR, Henbest ML, et al: Nonhemorrhagic ve-
nous infarction of the spinal cord. Ann Neurol 15: 379–385,
1984
20. Koyanagi I, Tator CH, Lea PJ: Three-dimensional analysis of
the vascular system in the rat spinal cord with scanning electron
microscopy of vascular corrosion casts. Part 2: Acute spinal
cord injury. Neurosurgery 33:285–292, 1993
21. Koyanagi I, Tator CH, Theriault E: Silicone rubber microan-
giography of acute spinal cord injury in the rat. Neurosurgery
32:260–268, 1993
22. Lazorthes G, Gouaze A, Zadeh JO, et al: Arterial vasculariza-
tion of the spinal cord. Recent studies of the anastomotic sub-
stitution pathways. J Neurosurg 35:253–262, 1971
23. Liss L: Fatal cervical cord injury in a swimmer. Neurology 15:
675–677, 1965
24. McVeigh JF: Experimental cord crushes with especial reference
to the mechanical factors involved and subsequent changes in
the areas of the cord affected. Arch Surg 7:573–600, 1923
25. Nakano I, Mannen T, Mizutani T, et al: Peripheral white matter
lesions of the spinal cord with changes in small arachnoid ar-
teries in systemic lupus erythematosus. Clin Neuropathol 8:
102–108, 1989
26. Nelson E, Gertz SD, Rennels ML, et al: Spinal cord injury. The
role of vascular damage in the pathogenesis of central hemor-
rhagic necrosis. Arch Neurol 34:332–333, 1977
27. Ne˘mecˇek S: Morphological evidence of microcirculatory dis-
turbances in experimental spinal cord trauma. Adv Neurol 20:
395–405, 1978
28. Ohshio I, Hatayama A, Kaneda K, et al: Correlation between
histopathologic features and magnetic resonance images of spi-
nal cord lesions. Spine 18:1140–1149, 1993
29. Quencer RM, Bunge RP, Egnor M, et al: Acute traumatic cen-
tral cord syndrome: MRI-pathological correlations. Neurora-
diology 34:85–94, 1992
30. Rao KR, Donnenfeld H, Chusid JG, et al: Acute myelopa-
thy secondary to spinal venous thrombosis. J Neurol Sci 56:
107–113, 1982
31. Reed JE, Allen WE III, Dohrmann GJ: Effect of mannitol on the
traumatized spinal cord. Microangiography, blood flow pat-
terns, and electrophysiology. Spine 4:391–397, 1979
32. Rivlin AS, Tator CH: Regional spinal cord blood flow in rats
after severe cord trauma. J Neurosurg 49:844–853, 1978
33. Sandler AN, Tator CH: Review of the effect of spinal cord trau-
ma on the vessels and blood flow in the spinal cord. J Neuro-
surg 45:638–646, 1976
34. Sasaki S: Vascular change in the spinal cord after impact injury
in the rat. Neurosurgery 10:360–363, 1982
35. Schneider H: Acute and chronic pathomorphological reactions
to cord injury. in Schramm J, Jones SJ (eds): Spinal Cord
Monitoring. Berlin: Spring-Verlag, 1985, pp 103–120
36. Shingu H, Kimura I, Nasu Y, et al: Microangiographic study of
spinal cord injury and myelopathy. Paraplegia 27:182–189,
1989
37. Tator CH: Ischemia as a secondary neural injury, in Salzman
SK, Faden AI (eds): The Neurobiology of Central Nervous
System Trauma. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994,
pp 209–215
38. Tator CH: Review of experimental spinal cord injury with em-
phasis on the local and systemic circulatory effects. Neuro-
chirurgie 37:291–302, 1991
39. Tator CH: Spinal cord cooling and irrigation for treatment of
acute cord injury, in Popp AJ, Bourke RS, Nelson LR, et al
(eds): Neural Trauma. Seminars in Neurological Surgery
Series. New York: Raven Press, 1979, pp 363–369
40. Tator CH, Fehlings MG: Review of the secondary injury theo-
ry of acute spinal cord trauma with emphasis on vascular mech-
anisms. J Neurosurg 75:15–26, 1991
41. Turnbull IM: Microvasculature of the human spinal cord. J
Neurosurg 35:141–147, 1971
42. Turnbull IM, Brieg A, Hassler O: Blood supply of cervical spi-
nal cord in man. A microangiographic cadaver study. J Neu-
rosurg 24:951–965, 1966
43. Tveten L: Spinal cord vascularity. III. The spinal cord arteries
in man. Acta Radiol (Diagn) 17:257–273, 1976
44. Vlajic I: Microangiographic observations of morphological ves-
sel changes after experimental spinal cord trauma. Adv Neurol
20:451–460, 1978
45. Wallace MC, Tator CH, Frazee P: Relationship between post-
traumatic ischemia and hemorrhage in the injured rat spinal
cord as shown by colloidal carbon angiography.Neurosurgery
18:433–439, 1986
Manuscript received September 18, 1995.
Accepted in final form September 24, 1996.
This work was supported by the Canadian Paraplegic Asso-
ciation, Ontario Branch; the Samuel Lunenfeld Research Foun-
dation; and the Medical Research Council of Canada. During the
course of this study, Dr. Koyanagi was a Fellow of the Rick Hansen
Man in Motion Legacy Fund.
Address for Dr. Koyanagi: University of Hokkaido School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
Address reprint requests to: Charles H. Tator, M.D., Ph.D.,
Division of Neurosurgery, The Toronto Hospital, Western Division,
399 Bathurst Street, McLaughlin Pavilion 2-435, Toronto, Ontario,
M5T 2S8 Canada.
492 J. Neurosurg. / Volume 86 / March, 1997
C. H. Tator and I. Koyanagi
Brought to you by NIH Library | Unauthenticated | Downloaded 07/16/26 11:52 AM UTC
